---
title:      iCIMS Talent Platform
summary:    Web app with tools to manage candidates and employees
template:   project.ejs
---
iCIMS' platform combines web portals reaching millions of applicants
with an administrative interface providing tools to thousands of HR
professionals to manage these applicants.

I began at iCIMS using HTML and CSS to style clients' web portals to
match their websites' look and feel, in addition to building custom web
forms for their application processes. This forced me to "view source"
on countless websites and build a strong foundation in understanding CSS
cascade and working with production CSS in the wild.

Shortly afterward, I began contributing to the source code behind both
of these products, making the underlying markup XHTML-valid, SEO and
accessibility-oriented. I wrote new templates for the custom forms to
take them from table-based layouts to CSS-based layouts to better
separate the presentation layer.

Next came a large effort to convert the entire admin interface from
IE-only compatibility to reach users on their browsers and platforms of
choice. Making an actual front-end architecture and better separating
concerns allowed us to implement a theming system for personalization of
the UI. This helped the organization realize the value of front-end
development and I became further involved in implementing new features.

Toward the end of my time at iCIMS, I became involved in prototyping and
feature design, conducting guerilla usability tests to substantiate
design decisions.
